---
title: "Gb_20130102"
date: 2022-10-24T08:49:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-10-29
tags: [go official blogs]
categories: [2022]
slug:
draft: true
---

# Two recent Go talks

Andrew Gerrand  
2 January 2013

## Introduction

Late last year I wrote a couple of Go talks and presented them at [Strange Loop](http://thestrangeloop.com/), [Øredev](http://oredev.com/), and various other venues. The talks are designed to give insight into the practice of Go programming, each describing the construction of a real program and demonstrating the power and depth of the Go language and its libraries and tools.

The following videos are, in my opinion, the best recordings of these talks.

## Go: a simple programming environment

Go is a general-purpose language that bridges the gap between efficient statically typed languages and productive dynamic language. But it’s not just the language that makes Go special – Go has broad and consistent standard libraries and powerful but simple tools.

This talk gives an introduction to Go, followed by a tour of some real programs that demonstrate the power, scope, and simplicity of the Go programming environment.

See the [slide deck](https://go.dev/talks/2012/simple.slide) (use the left and right arrows to navigate).

## Go: code that grows with grace

One of Go’s key design goals is code adaptability; that it should be easy to take a simple design and build upon it in a clean and natural way. In this talk I describe a simple “chat roulette” server that matches pairs of incoming TCP connections, and then use Go’s concurrency mechanisms, interfaces, and standard library to extend it with a web interface and other features. While the function of the program changes dramatically, Go’s flexibility preserves the original design as it grows.

See the [slide deck](https://go.dev/talks/2012/chat.slide) (use the left and right arrows to navigate).